---
title: "A Transgender Man: How My Development Through Adolescence Was Affected"
date: 2021-05-06
categories:
- Transgender
tags:
- Transgender
- New York University
keywords:
- transgender
- psychology
autoThumbnailImage: true
thumbnailImagePosition: "left"
thumbnailImage: images/a-transgender-man-how-my-development-through-adolescence-was-affected.jpg
coverImage: images/a-transgender-man-how-my-development-through-adolescence-was-affected.jpg
---
Growing up, I faced a lot of adversity within what Bronfenbrenner would call the microsystem of my ecological system. I was raised in a white lower-middle-class family that encountered a heavy tragedy when I was only eight years old; because of this, my parents struggled with their own mental and emotional well-being, which in turn greatly impacted my life and still does to this day. There were other complexities in my life before then, such as my struggle with my gender identity, that played a large role in my becoming the person I am today. In this paper, I will reflect on my childhood development through adolescence, focusing on it through the lens of  Sandra Lipsitz Bem’s Gender Schema Theory, as well as use several other theories introspectively to help better understand my personal development.

To begin, there are a few things that significantly shaped me and affected my development, but for this paper, I will narrow it down to one main factor: my gender identity. This factor has always been an exceedingly important part of my life, even before I had the words and understanding to describe it accurately. At this point in my life, I identify as a transgender male, meaning at birth, I was labeled as biologically female, but I do not identify with my sex assigned at birth.  I have taken several significant steps to medically transition in order to reflect my male gender identity to the rest of the world. However, I must point out that gender is a complex concept and that not all transgender people have the same experience as me or choose to take the same steps I did. This paper purely focuses on my unique life and does not at all portray the entirety of the transgender community, nor does it attempt to mediate or make a statement about the transgender community. Now, with the public service announcements out of the way, how has my gender identity played a role in my childhood development?

Well, taking a look at it first with Albert Bandura’s theory of Social Learning in mind, one could argue that this had very little impact on my overall development. Because Bandura’s theory emphasizes a passive child within the social world instead of an active one trying to comprehend the social world, through this perspective, my gender identity was just acquired behaviors for my stereotyped sex. However, in my case, this leaves more questions than answers. In his book Social-Learning Theory of Identificatory Process, Bandura states that “the presence of feminine interests, mannerisms, and personality characteristics in a boy who identified strongly with an effeminate father would receive low scores on paternal identification” and that “it is apparent from these examples that identificatory behavior has no intrinsic defining properties- independent of the behavior of the persons who have been emulated.” In accordance with this part of his theory, gender qualities of a person that does not meet the social standard of the culture manifest from specific, deviant behaviors from others. It also means that those who emulate the nonstereotypical gender-based behaviors of the opposite gender of their sex given at birth are ranked lower in social aspects. Now, while I believe Bandura missed the mark on this part of his theory, I think it is important to discuss how my development through adolescence did not relate to this theory in order to understand better what it did relate to. Growing up I did not have anyone in my immediate microsystem that was transgender or who did not adhere to the American bi-gender culture. I also was not forced to imitate the opposite sex at any point in my childhood for any reason; in fact, for a time in my life, I was forced to conform to gendered normalities of the female sex, my sex assigned at birth. So, why is the social learning theory inherently important to understanding my development if it does not help describe or relate in an accurate way how I grew up?

Because in understanding transgender people, it is crucial to understand that we are not a product of bad parenting, social pervertedness, or a combination of the two. There is a common infatuation with trying to explain how someone “becomes transgender” as if it is inherently wrong. The ideation behind that sentiment is misplaced, as people do not just “become transgender” but rather transition after they come to terms with their gender. Unfortunately for Bandura’s account, being transgender is not the result of a parent misportraying what gender a child should emulate. And in my childhood, this was certainly not the truth. Throughout early childhood, I eagerly mimicked both genders in my play and through my self-expression. I would often choose to play stereotypically male roles or dress in ‘male’ clothing, but I would also happily fill specific female roles. However, my development, aside from my gender, followed a pretty normal path in relation to the Social Learning Theory. As per my wellness wheel model, my high intellectual wellness would support healthy development in school areas. Both my language and reading development pursued what he would consider “the provisions of social models,” and I would have been judged as proficient in “emulat[ing] the behavior of [the] socially component in all other aspects of my growth (Bandura 1969 p.213). This very much included my physical wellness as a child and remains true to this day. My wellness model shows a very high score of 26, as my physical health was something that has always remained important to me. Throughout my childhood, I played sports such as soccer and basketball as a way to feel more masculine, and in high school, I joined a competitive swimming team that I excelled on.

In opposition to the Social Learning Theory, Jean Piaget's theory of Cognitive Development see’s children as an active participant in their maturation. According to Meagan Patterson in her article entitled “Cognitive Development, Theory of'' Piaget's theory is “based on the premise that disparate aspects of cognition develop together, undergoing similar changes” and it “explored many aspects of children's thinking, including beliefs about the physical, biological, and social worlds.” In correlation to gender, this theory postulates that a child’s need for cognitive consistency will drive them to label themselves as male or female and then, in turn, motivate them to participate in gender congruent activities based upon the societal norm of that gender (Patterson 2018 p. 2). This idea speaks more accurately for my development than the Social Learning Theory. I actively labeled myself and sought out activities that fit with my gender, echoed in my model's social wellness category. While I lacked support for my gender expression by family, it empowered me to foster sound, working relationships with very close friends; this, in turn, made me very empathetic and loving to those who accepted my behaviors. However, it was a lot more complex. As part of this theory, there is a lack of social persuasion and pressure in consideration of this, as well as a lack of explanation as to why gender takes a primary role over in development of other defining characteristics such as race or religion. What this theory fails to explain was a huge part of what I believe to significantly impact my development.

Growing up, I labeled myself as male, wore male clothes, and played stereotypical male games however, I also participated in stereotypically female undertakings. This was primarily due to the pressure I felt from those around me to act or look a certain way, especially those in my microsystem and mesosystem. As Carol Lynn Martin and Diane Ruble discuss in their paper “Children’s Search for Gender Cues Cognitive Perspectives on Gender Development,” this is,  in part, a natural part of children exploring their gender and their association with it. As they put it, “The emergence of gender identity and a growing understanding of the stability of social group membership affects children’s motivation to learn about gender, to gather information about their gender group, and to act like other group members'' (Martin and Ruble, 2004 p.68). However, their research often identifies children at much younger ages than I was and often points out the success of fitting into one group. For me, their description of a “waxing and waning” sense of gender that allows for a more flexible expression of one’s self fits better, just on a much more intense and longer-lasting scale. In grade school, I was often made fun of for how I looked or for wanting to participate in the boys' activities. By middle school, I was forced to wear female clothing that my mom picked out, and by the time I entered high school, I was often subjected to being watched while I showered to make sure that I shaved away all my body hair. In an article entitled “Qualitative Study of the Processes of Transgender-Men Identity Development,” the authors cite that they found the most damaging aspects to transgender men (as self-reported) and their development were “restrictions on performing these activities, prohibitions and scolding and even physical abuse if they insisted on doing activities associated with children of the opposite sex or attempted to resemble them.” I found myself in the same boat, as the type of abuse I received within my microsystem stunted me in a lot of ways.

These humiliating and disconfirming acts made me very mentally unwell and affected my day-to-day emotional stability. My wellness wheel model shows that I still am recovering from the traumatizing impact this had on my emotional wellbeing. Just like I was as a child, I still often find myself troubled when trying to express my true feelings, especially if it relates to my gender. This also affected my ability to govern certain emotions in triggering situations, and I am still trying to allow myself to adjust to change in positive ways.

## Instincts

> It very much stunted my ability to read those around me and put myself in environments that would help me to thrive. As is demonstrated in my wellness wheel, I still score low in environmental wellness, mainly due to my inability to leave toxic environments when necessary. It is so deeply ingrained to blindly follow unjust rules and be submissive that I find it hard to help myself or those around me.

Now, these are some intense, radical examples from my life that genuinely affected my development in ways I cannot even begin to wrap my head around. However, they are important to discuss because of the emotional stress and disconnect I felt about how I wanted to express myself vs. how I was expected to express myself. Piaget failed to acknowledge how conflicting internal feelings about their world could influence one’s overall development. And while Martin and Ruble understood and hypothesized a good cognitive model for the development of gender, they acknowledge that many questions such as “What cues might children use to lead them to conclude that their gender is different from their biological sex?” still go unanswered. For me, the dissonance between my innermost instincts and people’s projected perspective of gender norms caused daily strife. I was not confused as many people tried to convince me of but this constant tension made me anxious and depressed. My social development was stagnant for years; I had few friends, I talked to very few people, and often did not know how to appropriately express myself in social situations, which often led to even more problems. I also struggled with my emotional regulation, lashing out at my parents for their lack of support and often controlling demeanor. They parented with an authoritarian parenting style, which caused many issues; they expected me to blindly follow absurd rules, such as what to wear and how to act, but with no logical explanation. They also reacted with harsh punishments when I did not do exactly as they said, such as locking me out of the house. A vicious cycle of depression and anger ruled my behavior, which subsequently led to maladaptive coping mechanisms such as self-harm. These aspects of my life altered who I was outwardly; my true self was unable to develop amidst my inner turmoil. It very much stunted my ability to read those around me and put myself in environments that would help me to thrive. As is demonstrated in my wellness wheel, I still score low in environmental wellness, mainly due to my inability to leave toxic environments when necessary. It is so deeply ingrained to blindly follow unjust rules and be submissive that I find it hard to help myself or those around me.

Encapsulating my overall development, observing it through Sandra Bam’s theory of Gender Schema, I see that for a long time, I did not typically progress like other individuals. As stated in her original article titled “Gender Schema Theory and Its Implications for Child Development: Raising Gender-aschematic Children in a Gender-schematic Society,” Bam surmises that gender schema is “a generalized readiness on the part of the child to encode and to organize information, including information about the self, according to the culture's definitions of maleness and femaleness.” Essentially, a child creates a schema or a network of associations that organize and then guide one’s perception, which then leads them to categorize ‘male’ and ‘female’ traits and attributes into their respective groups. Thus, after enough of this constructive process has been done for the child to have a firm grasp on the concept of different genders, they will assimilate themselves into the concept of the gender schema; they choose to begin to reflect on their gender as they have processed it. For me, the idea of the Gender Schema Theory fits best with my development through adolescence. It condenses some of the aspects I experienced in my childhood and adolescence and promotes better alternatives in parenting I think would have helped change the outcome of my development. For example, in my primary school days, I was often conflicted while reading because of the characters I related to. More often than not, I felt more afflicted towards male characters despite society around me saying I should relate more to the female characters. In her article, Bam describes that she altered the books she read to her children to be less sex-typed and more gender neutral to be inclusive and broaden her children’s idea of ‘male’ and ‘female’ (Bam 1983, p.611). In doing so, the hope was to allow her children more time to think about the social environment and characteristics rather than label them rigidly (Bam 1983, p.611).

As mentioned earlier, I was expected to follow rigid outlines for gender blindly. The consequences for not doing so as a child were less harsh, but I still felt trapped; my emotional and social wellness suffered, and my overall development did as well. The Gender Schema Theory asserts that if you allow the child to follow their cognition based on their perception of gender and sex-typing, then they will ultimately have a normal gender and cognitive growth (Bam 1983, p. 607). Because I was unable to do so, my entire microsystem seemed to fall apart. During middle school, I suffered greatly from severe social anxiety, even around my family, and my depression kept me from doing anything other than school work. My lack of social skill further spurred my mother to try to make me meet her unrealistic standards. I was only allowed to attend after-school events led by her, and I was never permitted social interaction outside of school that was not monitored. I had no self-esteem and retreated from the outside world. To me, this is best reflected in my spiritual wellness from the model. I scored the lowest here at a 14, as I am still unable to find my purpose in life and how I fit into the world. Because I was always governed by others, I never felt the need to imagine my future or felt like I could take control of my destiny. I have worked to regain that feeling of control in my life but still lack some essential components.

The most compelling message from Bam’s gender schema theory is one of hope. It was something I could not grasp as a child and still have trouble with today due to my experiences. As she says on the last page of her article, “human behaviors and personality attributes should no longer be linked with gender, and society should stop projecting gender into situations irrelevant to genitalia.” This quote resonated with me; before the beginning of my transition at 18, I struggled with not being able to portray myself in the way I wanted. But after transitioning, I felt bad about how much I depended on other people’s judgments and validation surrounding my identity. This was one of the behaviors I denoted in my action plan that I feel would support me if I took more work to resolve it. It is something I still need to work on, as it substantially affects how I feel and act around others. I can see how it would impact my work as a counselor because I need to be able to focus entirely on the clients I am trying to help instead of worrying about their perception of me. The mental gymnastics of changing my way of thinking has been something I have been going to a therapist for since I was 16 but still have yet to overcome it. However, I believe that by the time I graduate college, I will have spent enough time and effort and made great progress in being more selfless in my thinking. By continuing my therapy, I hope to lessen the effects these thoughts have on my life and be able to use what I have learned in my future practice. Not only will it help my mental health overall, but not having to worry about how others think of me and the general tiredness that that way of thinking brings me will be a weight lifted from my shoulders. By lessening it, I will also be better at relating to future patients who may experience the same troubles or have a better comprehensive approach to treating clients. By working on this behavior, I hope to learn more about who I really am to better help those who do the same in the future.
