+++
autoThumbnailImage = true
categories = ["Autism"]
coverImage = ""
date = 2020-07-30T04:00:00Z
keywords = []
tags = ["Parenting", "Psychology"]
thumbnailImage = ""
thumbnailImagePosition = ""
title = "Autism and Parenting"

+++
Effective Parenting for Children with Autism; Using Therapy to Create a Better Parent-Child 

Relationship

Parents of children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) face different challenges than those with neurotypical children; often they have little or no knowledge of ASD and therefore find it more difficult to ease into a natural parenting style with their child. Children with ASD often persistently struggle with social interaction, communication skills, and restrictive/repetitive behaviors, although the severity presents itself differently in every person ([American Psychiatric Association, 2018](https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/autism/what-is-autism-spectrum-disorder)). Dependent on a child's current functionality and skills, parents of ASD children are presented with difficult tasks that can foster doubt in their own parenting abilities. This often spills over into other aspects of the parent-child relationship, creating more stress and an inability to effectively parent due to reasons such as fear or stigma. Many aspects of this affect the relationship in a negative way and can often be the cause of stagnation or decline in progress for the child.

This can exhibit large scale problems for both the parent and child, some of which are explored in [Cynthia A. Serrata](http://eds.b.ebscohost.com.proxy.library.nyu.edu/eds/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=2&sid=63e6c1c6-53e9-43b2-aaa7-9fdf1ac4b5d9%40pdc-v-sessmgr05)’s work entitled “Psychosocial Aspects of Parenting a Child with Autism.” Her article, as well as previous works, examines the changes in relationships and other effects of having an autistic child. She thoroughly reviews studies that assess the stressors, mental aspects, and parent self-efficacy that can affect parenting autistic children while maintaining a focus on creating a positive relationship between parent and child. With the knowledge from these prior works, Serrata analyzes the efforts that have been put forth to help parents retain or re-establish a positive and effective parenting style that works for their child. Certain therapy, training, and counseling has been studied to see their effects on parent relationships with children with ASD and the subsequent changes in parenting. However, how are these types of resources helpful to the overall development of effective parenting skills if their main focus is on building a positive parent-child relationship?

As Serretta describes it, "rehabilitation counselors can also provide patents with parent skills training and educate them on the use of problem-solving skills," as well as the support they provide for emotional and mental well being for the relationship. However, she neglects to describe any of the types of counseling that is available to parents specifically for enhancing their parenting skills. But with further research into the types she does mention for building positive parent-child relationships, there seems to be significant findings for subsequent enhancements in parenting skills for certain types of bonding or behavioral therapies. For instance, a study entitled "The Effect of Cognitive Behavioral Counseling on Parent-Child Relationship in Mothers of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder" that was published in June of 2020, looked at a population of forty eligible mothers with children diagnosed with ASD. The three authors, Dr. Hamidi, Shirazizadeh, and Ebrahim Damavandi, wanted to research the effectiveness of group cognitive behavioral counseling on the parents with children who have ASD, specifically looking at the communication interactions. The forty participants were randomly split into two groups of 20, and were then instructed to complete the Child-Parent Relationship Scale questionnaire that assessed the current standing between parent and child (Hamidi et al 53). One group of mothers then received intervention in the form of group cognitive behavioral counseling for ten, one-hour sessions while the other remained as a control group, receiving no intervention training (Hamidi et al 53).

The findings from this study showed that the participants that received group counseling became more effective at communication interactions with their child, with a significant p-value equal to 0.001 demonstrating its overall effectiveness as compared to the control group (Hamidi et al 54). Not only was the counseling group found to have improved communication with their child because but they also showed an improvement in implementing coping strategies, managing stress, and it had a positive effect on the parent-child relationship (Hamidi et al 55). On the effects of parenting skills, they describe that “parenting is a complex activity involving many specific behaviors that parents use individually” but the “group cognitive behavioral intervention method can be effective on improving parenting for children with autism spectrum disorder” (Hamidi et al 51, 56). While they do not analyze the overall effects in relation to specific parenting skills, the study shows how a multifaceted counseling approach establishes a better relationship between a mother and child with ASD; in the case of cognitive-behavioral counseling, it can be inferred that the betterment of the parent-child relationship showed further advancements in parenting, emphasizing a better awareness of the child that enables more effective responses in the mothers. Inherently, this positive aspect of group counseling could be more effective in giving necessary skills and resources to parents that spill over into being more accepting, efficacious parents for their children. As Serretta puts it, cognitive behavioral therapy “ teaches individuals to use effective problem-solving skills in dealing with their situation” which, in light of the study, the mothers were to gain such awareness and skills that have the potential to be further converted into other enhanced parenting abilities.

The interpretation of that study displays an acute understanding of how parents can take away new capabilities that transfer into their parenting. However, in another study that looks at a very similar therapy, a more concise and grounded outcome was found. Forty mothers with children were found and then divided into two groups. The first group consisted of twenty children with ASD who were presenting behavioral problems at home and their parents. The second group was also made up of parents and children also presented behavioral problems at home but had no known ASD diagnosis. Both groups were then asked to complete a Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) course. The article depicting the study was entitled “Parent–Child Interaction Therapy for children with autism spectrum disorder and a matched case-control sample” and looked to see if this form of therapy intervention would significantly improve the social responsiveness, behaviors and adaptive functioning of children with ASD. Its focus is on enriching the quality of parent-child relationships through coaching skills during parent-child play while also trying to promote positive parent behaviors and parent directed interaction (Ginn et al 1). Parents received weekly PCIT from four primary therapists for sixty minutes and were instructed to practice skills they learned for 5-10 minutes at home daily. The therapy was tailored towards the children's specific needs so that parents could learn how to best implement practices at home as well as provide an all encompassing therapy that would be most effective for both parent and child. However, directed practices and shaping techniques during play were the same for all participants, as well as other strategies that remained consistent with standard PCIT practices. Additionally, toys that promoted repetitive and/or stereotyped behavior were avoided in PCIT because they were inconsistent with former PCIT practices and found to be part of a less/ineffective program strategy. Parents were also asked to complete weekly homework of varying levels during therapy for them to gain more knowledge for performing different skill sets with their child.

Looking at the results from this study, it was found that “children with ASD exhibited significant improvements in core features of the disorder, including social responsiveness, social skills, adaptability, and restricted and repetitive behaviors” with very similar results and progression as those who participated but did not have ASD (Ginn et al 6). These findings were significant in proving the effectiveness of PCIT for reducing disruptive behaviors for children with ASD, as well as demonstrating its ability to replicate outcomes of the same time progression as those who were involved but did not have ASD. Comparable to the first study discussed, PCIT was found to create a more positive relationship between caregiver and child, with considerable improvements in emotional expression and regulation (Ginn et al 7). Even more substantial were the outcomes found for how these results presented in parents. There was a “dramatic increase in positive parenting statements” which was found to be a major factor in decreasing disruptive behavior in children with ASD. Additionally, it increased effectiveness in communication in a similar manner to the first study. However, the PCIT study proved effective at not only increasing positive affirmation from parents that promoted more productive communication skills but also largely decreased negative statements in parents (Ginn et al 7); reduction in negative verbalizations caused a serious reduction in unwanted behaviors for children with ASD, as seen in previous studies with greater results (Ginn et al 7). The overall effects of PCIT on parenting demonstrated a large increase in useful, positive communication that could be applied outside of the play setting and furthermore revealed that its use was highly effective at not only gaining favourable behavior in children with ASD but also established a better parent-child relationship. These acquired parenting skills substantiate a potent parenting style that individual caregivers are able to harness and further develop with their children. In the case of PCIT, it proved not only to help with the parent-child relationship and reduced unwanted behaviors, but “parents of children with ASD learn\[ed\] positive parenting skills to mastery” intrinsically through the process of parent-child interactive play (Ginn et al 7).

It is also important to note that both studies focused on parent-child implemented interventions despite being aided or guided by clinicians. The cognitive behavioral groups were led by therapists but had a strong focus on guiding parents through interactions with their children while not directly working with them. The same went for the therapists who guided mothers in PCIT for skills used to play with their children. While the studies proved to aid in parenting skills, it is very important to note that clinical interventions between a child and therapist are often necessary and principally more effective than just parent directed interventions or therapy. As described in “Moving towards a more ecologically valid model of parent-implemented interventions in autism” by Aubyn Stahmer and Melanie Pellecchia, “a recent meta-analysis - found significantly greater improvements in clinician-implemented studies with small to no effects in parent-implemented studies.” They describe several factors such as parents needing extensive training and having trouble creating high intensity in interventions with their children, that generally hold back progress typically seen in clinical settings with children (Stahmer et al 1). So while these types of therapies and counseling have shown to be helpful in establishing better parent-child relationships as well as encouraging positive parenting skills, it should not replace professional help nor should parents be expected to take on the role of a therapist. Stahmer and Pellecchia say that there should be “a shift from expecting parents to become therapists to helping parents succeed at parenting,” and that this should become the outlook these types of interventions aim at providing. In analyzing the previous studies as well as the criticism, there is much to be found in modeling studies after a question such as “What is the best way to help parents at parenting children with ASD?” instead of “How can we improve the therapeutic relationship built between a parent and child with ASD?”. And although it is often necessary for a caregiver to take on such a role, it should not overcome the role of being a parent.

An overview of both the cognitive behavioral counseling and PCIT indicates that certain aspects of the therapy can help parents with parenting skills and create a positive relationship with their child. The cognitive counseling found improvement in communication that ultimately helped mothers be more aware of their child’s needs as well as responding and processing them in a better mannered way when parenting. PCIT has similar discoveries but additionally saw an increase in positive affirmations that led to more precise emotional regulation which not only bettered the parent-child relationship but presented more effective parenting when it came to reducing unwanted behaviors. With a more holistic view on both, it can be found that improving the parent-child relationship can inherently enhance the way parents parent a child with ASD. Yet, because the studies did not focus on the parenting styles, instead leaving it to be naturally changed, there was a less conclusive outcome than if there had been any direction added for the benefit of parenting. That being said, the strides made by parents were not insignificant and were found helpful in the overall relationship the research intended to strengthen. The subsequent finding of refined parenting skills and styles were helpful in many ways outside of the research and most likely had a larger effect than was recorded due to being an oversight in the cognitive behavioral counseling study.

In effect, both therapies were successful and beneficial in many ways that were able to improve the daily lives of parents and children diagnosed with ASD while simultaneously providing outlets for advancing parenting skills outside the home setting. However, criticism should not be ignored; many of these types of therapies could benefit further from emphasizing the aspects of parenting while continuing to give parents clinical skill sets to work with. Much more could be done if these studies were able to find a happy medium that provided therapy-like expertise in a way that embraces parenthood more. It would also help in destigmatizing the ASD community by creating ways for parents to feel ‘normal’ in the way that they interact and connect with their child. Further research should look at the limitations of not incorporating parent skill sets into these types of therapy to see if it is more advantageous at building the parent-child relationship by adding it.

Works Cited

Hamidi, Farideh, et al. “The Effect of Cognitive Behavioral Counseling on Parent-Child Relationship in Mothers of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.” _Health Education and Health Promotion_, Health Education and Health Promotion, 10 June 2020, hehp.modares.ac.ir/article-5-41765-en.html.

Parlade, Meagan, et al. “Parent–Child Interaction Therapy for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and a Matched Case-Control Sample.” _Shibboleth Authentication Request_, June 2019, journals-sagepub-com.proxy.library.nyu.edu/doi/full/10.1177/1362361319855851#bibr86-1362361319855851.

Serretta, Cynthia. “Psychosocial Aspects of Parenting a Child with Autism.” _American Psychology Association_ , 2012, psycnet.apa.org/record/2012-35343-004.

Stahmer, Aubyn, and Melanie Pellecchia. “Moving towards a More Ecologically Valid Model of Parent-Implemented Interventions in Autism.” _Shibboleth Authentication Request_, 2015, journals-sagepub-com.proxy.library.nyu.edu/doi/10.1177/1362361314566739.