+++
autoThumbnailImage = true
categories = []
coverImage = ""
date = 2022-11-20T05:00:00Z
keywords = []
tags = []
thumbnailImage = ""
thumbnailImagePosition = ""
title = "Brazillian Mental Health Care: The Experience of One Queer Male"

+++
**Abstract**

This ethnographic research study uses an interview of one queer, white-presenting, Brazillian male to explore the influences of the environment on his experiences with mental health care in Brazil. The preexisting gap in literature led the researcher to choose this topic because of the importance noted in cultural aspects of psychology as well as the awareness that Westernized ideology happens to dominate psychological health care in several parts of the world. The qualitative design comprised a thirty-minute semistructured interview with the participant. A thematic analysis was used to analyze and code the resulting data. There were two main themes that emerged: privilege plays a role and lack of emphasis on identity. The study confirmed some claims from past research in relation to influences of political and governmental ideology and brought forth new information surrounding the specific experience of AP with the Brazillian mental health care system.,

**Brazillian Mental Health Care: The Experience of One Queer Male**

This ethnographic study aimed to describe the environmental influences growing up in Brazil has on one queer, white male’s experience of mental health care. The participant of this study comes from a lower-middle-class family that resides in Campinas, Brazil. The participant, a white presenting queer male, grew up in BLANK but has lived in the United States for the past four years. It is noted that the participant was born in Florida and has United States citizenship, although the rest of his family does not.

According to an article published in _The Lancet,_ Prince et al. (2007) argued that mental health has primarily been neglected on a global scale and that there was a gap between the need for mental health services versus the availability. They point to epidemiologic estimates emphasizing the individual and social costs of undiagnosed and untreated mental illness; this is especially true for low or middle-income countries (Patel & Prince, 2010; Prince et al., 2007). Further, there is a lack of research on Brazilian mental health care and, moreover, an absence of research on the cultural aspects of mental health care practices within Brazil (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). Thus, it is important to explore the lived experiences of Brazilians accessing mental health care to understand how the cultural environments of their mental health care system affect people.

The purpose of looking at the experiences with mental health care from a Brazillian-American perspective is to widen the school of thought regarding global aspects of mental health care. Specifically, this paper attempts to put into perspective the multidimensional influences that environmental facets have on experiences with mental health care and how that may guide further knowledge regarding access to care, practitioner practices, and positive experiences with mental health care.

It is supposed that the unique perspective of someone who grew up and lived in Brazil for 26 years yet now lives in the United States may garner thoughts regarding the Brazillian cultural environment in mental health care while also having knowledge about westernized views on mental health care. This is important as western ideals tend to drive mental health practice and expectations (Awaad & Reicherter, 2016; Summerfield, 2012), but there is still a need for cultural sensitivity within a country's systems. To this end, this paper asks the question: How did the environmental influences of a Brazilian upbringing affect one queer, white, lower-middle-class male’s cultural experiences of mental health care?

**Literature Review**

It has been recognized that the lack of global unity on mental health care means there is no precedent for effective ways of treating mental illness in developing countries (Patel & Prince, 2010; Patel et al., 2011; Prince et al., 2007; Summerfield, 2012). Because of this, there is a lack of knowledge regarding the effects of a country's cultural environment on its mental health care system (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). It has been argued that movements such as the Movement for Global Mental Health export a Westernized model for diagnosing and treating mental illness (Summerfield, 2012), which may create a leading precedent for such mental health care systems. However, pushback asserts that such movements observe the concern for human rights and postcolonial openness between the global South and the global North (Patel et al., 2014). This suggests that there is no clear rationale for one way or the other. However, there have been calls for cultural sensitivity concerning standardized practices within mental health care systems across the globe (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019; Rose, 2018). It is stated that culture influences “cause, course and outcome of mental disorders, as well as explanations for mental distress” (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). These ideas assert that the issue of global mental health care should be culturally aware and sensitive because of the vast differences pertaining to each country’s unique population (Kirmayer & Swartz, 2014; Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019; Rose, 2018).

In cases like Brazil, the Brazilian Psychiatric Reform emerged due to the military dictatorship, which brought a uniquely political idea regarding mental health care (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). The reform depicted cultural differences as though they stemmed from economic and social differences, which was very similar to Italy’s reform, which also heavily influenced the Brazilian movement (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). The theoretical framework on which psychiatric care in Brazil is based is the Psychosocial Care Paradigm (Yasui et al., 2016). This Paradigm has asserted that their subject, which previously would have been seen as knowledgeable and functioning, would now be seen only as a subject expressing insanity (Yasui et al., 2016). This is problematic because political views within Brazil already see mental health as a class issue, acknowledging that those who do not have access to proper care, primarily because of low-income status, are more likely to succumb to their mental health issues ([Basaglia, 2014](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr11-1363461518824433)).

Since the 1980s, Brazil has recognized “Doença dos nervos” as a cultural idiom for the lower class's distress and mental health issues (Costa, 1987, [1989](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr23-1363461518824433); [Duarte, 1988](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr29-1363461518824433)). This idea of ‘nervos’ boils down to social and cultural issues that may create mental health issues for lower class populations as nothing more than a physical vehicle for something that defies biomedical understanding ([Costa, 1987](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr22-1363461518824433), [1989](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr23-1363461518824433); [Duarte, 1988](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr29-1363461518824433)). This establishes the idea that lower-class problems regarding mental health were something to be psychologized, leaving aside the sociocultural, historical, and political determinants of their behavior ([Dimenstein, 2000](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr3-1363461518824433); Lima & Oliveira Nunes, 2006). And even though Brazil has a universal public health care system, in practice, it is mainly comprised of private health financing due to the underfunding of the public sector (Oliveira & Dallari, 2016). It is also significant to note that the universal right to health care reform, much like their psychiatric reform, did not highlight a need for ethnic or cultural diversity (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019).

However, over time, the landscape marginally changed in practice so that Psychosocial Care Centers (CAPS, _Centros de Atenção Psicossocial_) and Family Health Strategy interventions became informed by nuanced ideas of psychiatry ([Ferreira Neto & Kind, 2011](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr30-1363461518824433)). However, because it was pioneered through graduate education and fostered in the private sector, none of those practices and ideas have yet made it into the public mental health care system ([Dimenstein, 2000](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr3-1363461518824433); [Lima & Oliveira Nunes, 2006](https://journals.sagepub.com/reader/content/17aa78f76fa/10.1177/1363461518824433/format/epub/EPUB/xhtml/index.xhtml#bibr54-1363461518824433)). Further, the idea of ‘nervos’ is still present, which is shown by the fact that cultural explanations are not incorporated into official documentation, health care policies, or everyday practices within Brazil (Lima & Oliveira Nunes, 2006).

Within the public mental health care system, two branches, community health care workers (ACS, _agentes comunitários de saúde_) and Community Therapy (TC, _terapia comunitária_ or _terapia comunitaria integrativa_), try to incorporate cultural sensitivity and diversity into their practice (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). Neither are true forms of psychotherapy but they aim to bridge the gap between cultural idioms such as ‘nervos’ and the knowledge of medical science (Ortega & Wenceslau, 2019). But there is still a huge lack of knowledge regarding the cultural awareness and sensitivity of mental health care providers within Brazil.

Even more sparse than the research and literature surrounding cultural awareness in Brazillian mental health care is the lack of knowledge surrounding LBGT+ mental health care. Few studies, such as Terra et al. (2022), have looked into the relevance of mental health issues among the LGBT+ population in Brazil. But overall, no resounding studies have influenced protocol or legislature that aid in creating awareness for mental health professionals within Brazil about LGBT+ issues. Much like how ‘nervos’ dilutes the social and economic factors, ideas encompassing LGBT+ mental health in Brazil often go unspoken. Therefore, it is important to begin a discussion of how these ideas and factors can begin to be addressed.

**Method**

**Participant**

The researcher conducted an interview with the participant, who is a friend of the researcher’s partner. The participant will be referred to as ‘anonymous participant’ (AP) to maintain anonymity for AP, and ensure that their answers cannot be identified to AP. AP is 28 years old and lives in NYC, NY. He has resided in New York City for three years, previously living in Brazil. He is a US citizen, having been born in Florida but was raised in Brazil throughout his childhood. Growing up he describes his family as lower-middle class. AP identifies as a queer man and is white presenting although he has conflicting views about identifying as Hispanic or Latin.

**Procedure**

The thirty minute interview took place in the participant’s home which is in New York City. The interview was conducted in English, however, it should be noted that the native language of the participant is Portuguese. The participant is fluent in English and confirmed being comfortable doing the interview in English. Further, it was noted to AP that any questions and answers should only be answered if AP was comfortable doing so. The questions were prescreened by AP to ensure comfort levels. The interview was semi-structured with six prepared, open-ended questions. However, some alternative questions were asked to garner further information and elicit more in-depth responses from AP. Questions aimed to inform the researcher more about AP’s lived experiences with mental health care in Brazil and how his environment played a role in them.

**Results**

**First Theme: Privledge Plays a Role**

In this study, the researcher took note of how much AP talked about mental health care being a privilge in Brazil. It was stated that “there is a generational divide. The younger you are and the more privileged you are- the better chance you have to do therapy. I think it’s more accepted in privileged circles, but people make fun of it. There's probably also a gender and LGBT+ divide- they seem more open.” In these statements, AP addresses the disparities between ‘privledged’ communities in Brazil and minority groups. AP also ackowledges similar prevailing views with the literature that lower class individuals are less likely to to have access to the public mental health care system in Brazil. AP states, “There’s little or no access to mental health care in the public mental health care system. In the last month, Balsinaro made fun of disabled people- he’s a kind of nazi. There’s still a prevailing feeling that if you can take it \[your mental struggles\], then to \[stop being weak\].” This is consistent with literature the literature and expands on how politics and government interfere with access to their mental health care system. Stating the harmful retitoric of the previous president of Brazil emphasizes the current ideals being passed around by the Brazilian government and public towards mental health care in Brazil.

It was stated several time by AP that accessing the mental health care system could make one look ‘crazy’ and lead to ‘judgements’ from people. These ideas line up with the history of ‘nervos’ and what it means to be someone in need of mental health care. And while AP stated that he had “never heard of that term” a lot of the prevailing sentiments that he expressed about the public mental health care system, who was meant to use it, and ideas surrounding those who are meant to use it, line up with such rhetoric. However, AP did recognize the idiom “Doença dos nervos” although admitted that he did not know what it meant, stating that he believed it was used as “something to mean depression or anxiety.” Although AP did not expressidly connect the idea of “nervos” with the lower class, he did understand that it was not something typically attributed to the wealthy or people in positions of power.

**Second Theme: Lack of Emphasis on Identity**

The second emerging theme that came from the interview can be summarized by a lack of emphasis on individual identity. As stated in the previous literature review, there has been little to no research regarding LGBT+ mental health care in Brazil. This was backed up by AP stating, “My university was the gay paradise, but things like the Trevor Project and the LGBTQ+ center don’t exist. The LGBT+ community isn’t really a cohesive community, but I think there is this idea that marginalized populations- those are more in need than you are. So you would not reach out. Brazil is the country that kills the most transwomen, so it feels wrong to \[take advantage of mental health care systems\].” There is an underlying idea of heirarchy in terms of who should access and who gets access to mental health care. AP said he did not know of any LGBT+ specific mental health care options and further, in his experience, “had a therapist that tried to convince me that I was not gay or bisexual or whatever. And Brazil- bi-erasure is a thing, I guess. Other than that, I never had a problem. My father is not super accepting, but he ignores \[my identity\], you know.” This speaks to many aspects of their mental health care system, like the lack of diversity, cultural sensitivity, and a need for further research on options and access regarding LGBT+ specific options for mental health care.

**Critical Reflexivity**

Because I was the only researcher in the study, it was difficult to try and code based on the answers I had received and not just on the history and study I had read about. Both AP and I identify as gay white males, and therefore that was a predetermined sense of trust and bonding before going into the interview. I believe that this gave me an advantage because it seemed to make AP more comfortable answering questions and expanding on what he was saying. In particular, I found it quite interesting when AP’s answers did not match what the literature was saying, and several times I stopped myself from trying to guide his answers by asking pointed follow up questions. For example, AP mentioned, “Surprisingly not much. I never had a super issue being gay \[in or outside of therapy\]. A couple of months after my parent's divorce and my mom started dating a drug deal- my aunt put my sister and me in a monthly \[therapy\]. The therapist was, I guess, Jungian? I was always drawing things.” These statements in particular seemed to be contradicting giving some of the other answers provided by AP, however, I needed to remember and remind myself that his view was more insightful into how he saw and believed the cultural system around him worked given his upbringing.

Moreover, both AP and I grew up in the lower middle class status and are United States citizens. I think this predisposed me to believing that we came from very similar backgrounds, even though his answers did not nearly compare to my upbringing. Because of this constant reminded, I was able to focus and make sure that the interview was not skewed based on my perspectives and background knowledge but rather kept it open and comfortable for honest answers.

**Discussion**

The current study aimed to answer the following research question: How did the environmental influences of a Brazilian upbringing affect one queer, white, lower-middle-class male’s cultural experiences of mental health care? This question was chosen in order to fill a gap in the literature regarding the lack of research in mental health care in Brazil. Specifically, this research question wanted to look at one Brazillian’s experience with the mental health care system to garner information about the experiences and influences of the environment that affects the person, perception, and interaction with the mental health care system in Brazil. The thirty-minute interview conducted with AP, a queer Brazillian White presenting male, had two merging themes: Privilege plays a role and Lack of emphasis on identity. Both themes explored aspects of Brazilian culture that affected the experience with mental health care in Brazil but each delineated their own specific information regarding that experience.

For the first theme, privilege plays a role, it was found that in concordance with the literature, political and governmental ideals interfere with the ideas of mental health care in Brazil (Oliveira & Dallari, 2016). Moreover, the idea that privilege plays a role in access and experience with mental health care was parallel to what the literature says regarding those who are able to access quality mental health care in Brazil (Oliveira & Dallari, 2016).

The second theme, lack of emphasis on identity, was found to be relatively backed up, although there is a lack of literature. It was found through the interview that, when it comes to mental health care in Brazil, there is a lack of emphasis on one’s identity. Furthermore, as it was stated by AP, there are little to no sources for identity-specific mental health care options. This is similar to how literature emphasizes the lack of research and knowledge regarding LGBT+-specific mental health care in Brazil (Terra et al., 2020).

**Conclusion**

For the limitations of this study, the clearest and obvious is the small sample size. While studying the experience of one person can be helpful in finding out their experiences and generalizing their thoughts and ideas regarding the topic of interest, the small sample size limits generalizability to a larger population and could be only applicable to AP’s life experiences, rather than having similar experiences within the population. It is also important to mention that because of the researcher's background and history, it is difficult to completely suspend all and any biases that may have played a role in the coding process of this study. It is quite possible that there could have been misinterpretation throughout the analysis of AP’s answers or even misinformation due to leading follow-up questions in the interview. This study should be subject to further research and there should be a review done by AP to ensure content validity.

The current study does, however, have potential implications. Findings garnered from this ethnographic research paper could result in informing future research with similar or dissimilar findings when it comes to experiences with mental health care in Brazil. This study may also be able to shed light onto cultural aspects that play roles in the Brazillian mental health care system, or the lack of those aspects. This may aid future researchers in narrowing and guiding questions and interventions. Future research should focus on the lack of cultural awareness and sensitivity that was shown in this study, as well as look into LGBT+-specific options for mental health care in Brazil.

**References**

Costa, J. F. (1987). Conscieˆncia da doenc¸a como conscieˆncia do sintoma: a ‘‘doenc¸a dos nervos’’ e a identidade psicolo´gica. Cadernos do IMS, 1, 4–44.

Costa, J. F. (1989). Psicana´lise e contexto cultural: Imaginario Psicoanalı´tico, Grupos e Psicoterapias. Rio de Janeiro, Brasil: Campus.

Duarte, L. F. D. (1988). Da vida nervosa nas classes trabalhadoras urbanas. Rio de Janeiro, Brasil: Jorge Zahar.

Ferreira Neto, J. L., & Kind, L. (2011). Promoc¸ a˜o da Sau´de: pra´ticas grupais na estrate´gia Sau´de da Famı´lia. Sa˜o Paulo/ Belo Horizonte, Brasil: Hucitec.

Kirmayer, L. J., & Swartz, L. (2014). Culture and global mental health. In V. Patel, H. Minas, A. Cohen, & M. J. Prince (Eds.), Global mental health: Principles and practice (pp. 41–62). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Patel, V., & Prince, M. (2010). Global mental health: A new global health field comes of age. JAMA, 303, 1976–1977.

Patel, V. (2014). Why mental health matters to global health. Transcultural Psychiatry, 51, 777–789.

Prince, M., Patel, V., Saxena, S., Maj, M., Maselko, J., Phillips, M. R., & Rahman, A. (2007). No health without mental health. Lancet, 370, 859–877.

Rose, N. (2018). Our Psychiatric Future: The Politics of Mental Health. Cambridge, UK: Polity.

Summerfield, D. (2012). Afterword: Against ‘‘global mental health’’. Transcultural Psychiatry, 49, 519–530.