+++
autoThumbnailImage = false
categories = ["New York University", "Transgender"]
coverImage = ""
date = 2022-04-20T04:00:00Z
keywords = ["suicidal ideation", " puberty blockers", "gender affirmation", "transgender"]
tags = []
thumbnailImage = ""
thumbnailImagePosition = ""
title = "How Medical Gender Affirmations Change Suicidal Ideation for Transgender Youth"

+++
**Abstract**

Transgender youth face much higher suicide rates as compared to the general United States population. However, protective factors such as gender affirmations can play a protective role. This proposal looks to review the effects of gender affirmations in the form of medical interventions on body dissatisfaction and suicidal ideations for transgender youth. Interviews will be implemented at clinics within a region that supply puberty blockers to transgender youth to collect qualitative data regarding their thoughts of suicidal ideations before, during, and after their exposure to puberty blockers. Results can inform an understanding of how transgender youth think about suicide.

_Keywords: transgender, gender affirmation, puberty blockers, suicidal ideation_

**Gender Affirmations on Ideations**

**_Introduction_**

The lifetime suicide rate for transgender youth is roughly nine times that of the U.S. population, sitting at around 45% (Johns et al., 2019; James et al., 2016; Haas, Rodgers, & Herman, 2014). This is primarily due to the ostracization and discrimination they face and the alienation they feel from their own body (Johns et al., 2019; James et al., 2016). Often these create great mental distress for trans youth, which can go unnoticed. Such mental distress often manifests in suicidal ideations, which are the thoughts, ideas, contemplations, or preoccupations with death or suicide that a person experiences.

**_Literature Review_**

Much research on suicidal ideations has focused on the physical symptoms of such ideations, like self-harm, and how addressing such symptoms reduces suicidal outcomes. For example, research about protective factors, such as gender affirmations, has been found to reduce physical suicidal symptoms (Van der Miesen et al., 2018). Protective factors such as gender affirmations or the interpersonal confirmation of one’s gender from outside sources are also believed to reduce suicide rates among the transgender population (Kia et al., 2021; Mariccini et al., 2021; Price & Green, 2021; Sevelius, 2017; Turban et al., 2020; Van der Miesen et al., 2018). This belief was adopted after extensive studies on puberty blockers as a form of physical gender affirmation; findings saw reduced physical suicidal symptoms, which were then connected to reducing the suicide rate for transgender youth (Turban et al., 2020; Van der Miesen et al., 2018). There is a gap in the research on how or why gender affirmations such as puberty blockers do so. It could be that gender affirmations change the way transgender youth think and feel, thus changing their suicidal ideations.

However, this does not explain the inner workings of how the suicide rate was reduced. And given elevated suicide rates, it is imperative to look into the mental processes like suicidal ideations that can be the root cause of suicide. Therefore, this research proposal explores how physical gender affirmations, specifically puberty blockers, change suicidal ideations for transgender youth. This method of gender affirmation, as opposed to spoken gender affirmations or social affirmations of gender, was chosen because much research has been done on puberty blockers.

Hypothesizing, puberty blockers could lower the intensity of suicidal ideations by reducing the mental distress caused by going through puberty of a gender they do not identify as. If puberty suppressors help avoid such significant mental distress, then we should observe a lower suicide rate among transgender youth who receive this treatment. If this is the case, understanding how may allow for direct insight regarding successful interventions leading to changes in the thoughts that lead to suicide for this population. It would thus reveal what approaches may help alleviate or trigger this response among transgender youth.

**Methods**

**_Study Design_**

This qualitative research will be rooted in phenomenological studies that aim to examine human experiences through descriptions supplied by the participants. Initial data is intended to be collected at clinics within New York state that provide puberty suppressors for self-identified transgender youth. Youth who have their first appointment regarding puberty suppressors but have not yet started the medication will be informed of the research study. Initial interviews will be conducted after informed consent and assent are obtained from both parent(s) or guardian(s) and participant. Then contact information will be retained for follow-up interviews over the next two years. One interview will be conducted with the participant every month after their initial visit to the clinic. Interviews will consist of open-ended questions, giving the participant full liberty of response. After two years or any time the participant decides to drop out of the study, data collection with that participant will cease. Compensation for participants will come in the form of twenty dollars per interview for each participant. Parents will not receive compensation for their child(ren)’s participation and acknowledge this in their initial agreement to participate.

**_Participants_**

To recruit participants, receptionists will notify parents with children who have appointments for the first visit regarding puberty suppressors. It is noted that only those who have not started taking the medication for puberty suppression will be asked, as the study intends to look deeply into what suicidal ideations transgender youth have before, during, and after the start of medication. They will be told of the research study being conducted and then will be given the opportunity to ask for more information. If both the parent(s) and child are willing to participate, they will be given information regarding the background and aims of the study. A physical representation of this information (_i.e.,_ a pamphlet or brochure) will also be provided. Follow-up information will be given by both the receptionist as well as being stated to the physical representative. The parent and child can then choose whether they wish to participate: they will be given a physical handout including the researcher’s contact information. If they do not want to participate, no data is collected regarding their visit to the clinic. The following process will be implemented if they choose to participate after their first visit and still have not started puberty suppressors.

If the parent and child wish to participate, they will be taken in by the researchers before their initial appointment at the clinic is conducted. Researchers will reiterate the information from the physical handout and allow them to ask questions. Potential participants will be verbally informed of any possible adverse effects. If they still wish to participate, a formal proceeding will occur. They will be notified that if they want to discontinue being a part of the research, they are allowed to drop out at any time. Participants and their parents/guardians will be asked to sign a form agreeing to participate in the study, acknowledging their understanding and consent/assent. Contact information will be collected for follow-up measures. For their privacy, contact information will only be saved electronically and will be encrypted, so only the researchers have access. After the collection of contact information, the first interview will ensue.

**_Measures_**

Before any data is collected, interview questions will be assessed for content and face validity. Content validity will be evaluated by experts in the field through a strict evaluation of the questions. Based on this evaluation, the questions retained for the interviews will be numbered. Since the concurrent interviews will ask different questions, continuing assessments of questions will be made throughout the two-year interviews. Face validity will be conducted by researchers to make sure the items retained stay true to what the research question wants to look at. After these processes, initial interviews will ensue.

After consent/assent is received, voice-recorded interviews with the participants will be conducted to collect the qualitative data. Parents or guardians will be asked not to be in the room while the interview is conducted to ensure that the participants' answers are as accurate and truthful as possible. The first interview will be conducted before the participant's first appointment with puberty suppressors and will last approximately 30 minutes per participant. The participants’ interview will consist of approximately 15 open-ended questions, dependent on the expert assessments, regarding their current level of body dissatisfaction, suicidal ideations, and hopes regarding puberty suppressors. After their first interview, the participants will be allowed to attend their appointment without interference.

A follow-up interview with the participant will be conducted once a month over the course of the next two years. To make it as convenient as possible for participants and their parents, interviewers will meet with the participant at the most convenient place for the participant and parent. This means some interviews will be conducted in the home or other private, public spaces available for them to meet (private and public places may be a free room in a library or anywhere that allows for confidentiality for the participant to be maintained). New interview questions will be made and vetted for each interview in a timely manner so that all participants receive the same interview questions as each other. Varying interview questions will be used to garner as much deep and rich information as possible, given that the questions are not found to be invalid or unreliable at any point during interpretation or data collection.

After each interview, a short debrief will be conducted to assess the mental well-being of the participant. This will include asking about their feelings surrounding the interview as well as giving them the opportunity to further discuss anything that may have felt uncomfortable, upsetting, or even disturbing for them. If, during the interview or debriefing process, the participant vocalizes an intent to harm themself or poses a threat to themself or others, then a referral to a mental health provider will be made. Referrals will be made at the discretion of the interviewer. They can be done so without a specific cause, meaning they can do so under any circumstance if they believe it would be helpful for the participant. Interviewers are not required to do anything other than provide an outlet to the participants and, therefore, will not be expected to try and improve the participant's mental health. Since attending interviewers are not required to be licensed mental health professionals, they are not lawfully required to report suspected child abuse. Doing so will be left to the interviewers' discretion.

For the control variable, participants who finish the first interview but do not go on to any follow-up doctor's appointments regarding puberty suppressors and do not begin using puberty suppressors will be included in the research. Their interviews will follow exactly as the other participants do and the data collection and interpretation process. A potential baseline or comparison group could be established by having these participants in the study.

For data analysis, an interpretive phenomenological analysis will be used. For this process, the analyst will suspend their thoughts, views, and opinions when analyzing the data to try and ensure that results stay true to the participants’ data provided. Transcripts will be coded in extensive detail, by several analysts, with the focus shifting back and forth between the key points made by participants and researchers' interpretations of those key points made. Analysis should aim to make sense of participants’ perceptions of their experiences, and researchers will generate codes from the data instead of from a preconceived theory that may be applied to the data. After transcribing the data, researchers will annotate the text closely for insights relating to the participants’ experiences and perspectives. Emerging codes will be cataloged, and researchers will look for patterns/themes within the codes. Gradually, and if the process permits, themes may be categorized under superordinate themes. Final themes will be summarized and put into a table with salient quotes from participants that best represent the theme. Throughout the entire process of interviews, data collection, and interpretation, external audits will be conducted to examine the process and product for accuracy. Auditors will have no affiliation with the research. Further, a member check will be performed to solicit participants’ views of the credibility of the findings and interpretations.

**_Discussion_**

This qualitative research study has several strengths. Extensive procedures done to ensure content validity for the interview questions mean that there may be rich, descriptive data related to the topic of interest. Further, face validity will be assessed by both participants and researchers periodically throughout the data collection process, with respondent validation being a key component. For construct validity, audits made by impartial auditors will aid in assessing whether the interviews measured what was intended. Additionally, since the proposal aims to follow participants for two years, the research question about change in body dissatisfaction and suicidal ideation may be assessed in-depth and long-term. This may raise reliability if there is strong consistency with results. If strong themes emerge from the data analysis, insight into triggers and ways to alleviate body dissatisfaction and suicidal ideation may emerge, in which case findings could eventually be generalized with follow-up studies. This could lead to giant leaps toward lowering the suicide rate for transgender individuals due to a better understanding of the thought processes.  
 However, on the other hand, the long-term aspect of the study may lead to high attrition rates, threatening internal validity. Also related to this, maturation may threaten the validity of this research since it follows participants for an extended period. Lastly, untruthful answers to interview questions may pose a problem if it greatly affects the outcome of the research. Other limitations could be related to sample size, as this specific group may be unwilling to participate, or it may be hard to find large numbers of participants. Funding could also pose a limitation as little research is usually done for this minority group, and it may be difficult to find sponsors. For future research, a larger sample size and low attrition levels will be important. This could be done by scaling up to include other states or regions outside the country if resources are available. Additionally, although one of the resource problems is tried to be addressed by interviewers coming to the participants for interviews, there could be resource problems outside of this for the participants and their parents. In future studies, this may be lessened by having culturally inclusive practices (changing interview dates for religious, cultural, or personal reasons) as well. With adequate funding, it could also reduce the impact on time allocation for the interview on behalf of the parent or guardian; providing further incentives such as a meal or compensation for time taken off work would be needed. Further, researchers should look at different stages within the transition process, focusing on changes in suicidal ideation. This could be done by looking at the same research question with individuals receiving hormone affirmation therapy or even gender-affirming surgeries. Doing so would give a wider look at the overall change in suicidal ideation for the entire transgender population, not just transgender youth.

There are several ethical considerations within this proposal. The first is regards to research with minors. Ethical risks are high for various reseasons, especially since there is a stark, harsh political climate revolving around medical intervention for transgender youth. However, by gaining both parent and participants’ consent/assent, some of this hopes to mitigate ethical risks. Additionally, not recruiting participants for either group before they initiate the process to seek out puberty blockers (i.e., participants search, schedule, and arrive at their doctor’s appointment with no knowledge of the survey) influences decision-making regarding puberty blockers hopes to be mitigated, as it is entirely up to participants as to whether or not they choose to participate in the intervention. This could appease arguments that say the research forced the youth to begin taking medication for puberty suppression and even arguments that may claim the research aimed to ‘turn children transgender’. Moreover, since either group (control or dependent) can participate no matter their choice to take puberty suppressors or not, there should be no influence from the researchers to do either. This means that the research does not influence participants to take or not take medication for puberty suppression in order to participate in the study. This will combat arguments alluding that the payment incentive may have been influential in doing one or the other.

In addition to the ethical implications of working with children, there are many ethical implications in regard to their mental health. Because the study aims to look at changes in suicidal ideation, it could be considered unethical not to provide further mental health care for the participants. However, providing comprehensive mental health care such as therapy could impact the results of the study, potentially becoming a mediator for the change in suicidal ideations. Therefore, it was determined that to try and meet the participant's mental health needs but maintain reliability for the research, a debrief with no formal mental health training would be conducted. Safety nets for reporting potential harm that a participant may pose to themself or others are left to the discretion of the interviewers for similar reasons. And although interviewers will not be penalized for reporting or not, the participant's mental health will always be a top priority. Interviewers will be told to make their best judgment but to air on the side of caution while keeping the participant’s mental well-being at the forefront of their own minds.

Finally, the implications and impact of this study may vary widely depending on emerging themes and the descriptive data collected. However, overall findings should indicate if there are triggers or reliefs for suicidal ideation among transgender youth with or in the absence of puberty blockers. If neither of these is found, further research should look at other forms of gender affirmation for this population. By finding insight into triggers or reliefs, interventions may be created, or the promotion of pathways that help transgender youth with these can happen. This could drastically change suicide rates if done large scale. Additionally, legislature and perspective regarding medical intervention for transgender children could shift. It is difficult to speculate how they would shift, as it is a complex topic; however, the hope is that it provides transgender youth and individuals with their human rights and potentially increases accessibility to medical intervention. Follow-up research should focus on questions relating to suicidal ideations among the transgender population, such as the broader question of how do general gender affirmations such as vocal or social gender affirmation affect suicidal ideation among transgender youth? Or, it could look at how physical gender affirmations in other medical interventions affect suicidal ideation.

**_Dissemination Plan_**

My research finding aims to find how puberty suppressors affect suicidal ideation among transgender youth. These results can be used to inform mental health benefits of puberty suppressors and find triggers and reliefs for these thoughts. Such findings could influence future research and interventions to help lower the suicide risk among transgender individuals. My primary end-users are medical providers, who may better inform their patients of mental health outcomes, and parents who may use this information to inform themselves and their child(ren) about the risks and benefits of puberty suppressors. Large-scale, this aims to gain traction among politicians and legislatures to change existing stances/legislation to align with scientifically accurate views.

I plan to involve users in my dissemination efforts by obtaining feedback regarding how accessible and easily understandable the findings were. Additionally, finding out what was needed to translate research findings into practice within the previous settings mentioned. I can use the following individuals, organizations, and networks to help: the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH), the Trans Youth Equality Foundation, and the National Center for Transgender Equality. I will communicate the results by including the publication of research findings, collaboration with health care providers to understand implementation efforts for the findings, and collaboration with media outlets to make findings easily accessible and understandable to the general population.

In disseminating my research, potential obstacles include the absence of adequate funding, ethical arguments, and pushback from staunchly opposed believers who do not believe in transgender rights. I can mitigate these obstacles by securing funding or grants that ensure research will last two years; this may come from the aforementioned resources or maybe privately funded. I plan to evaluate the dissemination plan by receiving peer reviews from health care providers and experts within the field. I plan to encourage feedback from end-users and dissemination partners by writing reviews of the research, spreading scientifically-backed views within their practice, and providing feedback through direct conversation.

**References**

Grannis, C., Leibowitz, S. F., Gahn, S., Nahata, L., Morningstar, M., Mattson, W. I., Chen, D., Strang, J. F., & Nelson, E. E. (2021). Testosterone treatment, internalizing symptoms, and body image dissatisfaction in transgender boys. _Psychoneuroendocrinology_, _132_, 105358. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2021.105358](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2021.105358 "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2021.105358")

Haas, A. P., Rogers, P. L., & Herman, J. L. (2014). Suicide Attempts among Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming Adults. _American Foundation for Suicide Prevention_.

Hayden, L. (2020). Nurturing healthy transitions: Nutrition, exercise, and body image for transgender and gender diverse youth. _Adolescent Nutrition_, 795–820. [https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45103-5_26](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45103-5_26 "https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45103-5_26")

James, S. E., Herman, J. L., Anafi, M., Mottet, L., Keisling, M., & Rankin, S. (2015). The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey. _Washington DC: National Center for Transgender Equality_.

Johns, M. M., Beltran, O., Armstrong, H. L., Jayne, P. E., & Barrios, L. C. (2018). Protective factors among transgender and gender-variant youth: A systematic review by socioecological level. _The Journal of Primary Prevention_, _39_(3), 263–301. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s10935-018-0508-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10935-018-0508-9 "https://doi.org/10.1007/s10935-018-0508-9")

Kia, H., MacKinnon, K. R., Abramovich, A., & Bonato, S. (2021). Peer support as a protective factor against suicide in trans populations: A scoping review. _Social Science & Medicine_, _279_, 114026. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114026 "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114026")

Marraccini, M. E., Ingram, K. M., Naser, S. C., Grapin, S. L., Toole, E. N., O'Neill, J. C., Chin, A. J., Martinez, R. R., & Griffin, D. (2022). The roles of school in supporting LGBTQ+ Youth: A systematic review and ecological framework for understanding risk for suicide-related thoughts and behaviors. _Journal of School Psychology_, _91_, 27–49. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2021.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2021.11.006 "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2021.11.006")

McGuire, J. K., Doty, J. L., Catalpa, J. M., & Ola, C. (2016). Body image in transgender young people: Findings from a qualitative, community-based study. _Body Image_, _18_, 96–107. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2016.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2016.06.004 "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2016.06.004")

Price, M. N., & Green, A. E. (2021). Association of Gender Identity Acceptance with fewer suicide attempts among transgender and nonbinary youth. _Transgender Health_. [https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2021.0079](https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2021.0079 "https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2021.0079")

Romito, M., Salk, R. H., Roberts, S. R., Thoma, B. C., Levine, M. D., & Choukas-Bradley, S. (2021). Exploring transgender adolescents’ body image concerns and disordered eating: Semi-structured interviews with Nine gender minority youth. _Body Image_, _37_, 50–62. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2021.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2021.01.008 "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2021.01.008")

Sevelius, J., dickey, lore m., & Singh, A. A. (2017). Engaging in TGNC-affirmative research. _Affirmative Counseling and Psychological Practice with Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Clients._, 231–246. [https://doi.org/10.1037/14957-012](https://doi.org/10.1037/14957-012 "https://doi.org/10.1037/14957-012")

Turban, J. L., King, D., Carswell, J. M., & Keuroghlian, A. S. (2020). Pubertal suppression for transgender youth and risk of suicidal ideation. _Pediatrics_, _145_(2). [https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-1725](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-1725 "https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2019-1725")

Van der Miesen, A. I. R., Steensma, T. D., de Vries, A. L. C., Bos, H., & Popma, A. (2020). Psychological functioning in transgender adolescents before and after gender-affirmative care compared with cisgender general population peers. _Journal of Adolescent Health_, _66_(6), 699–704. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2019.12.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2019.12.018 "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2019.12.018")

Appendix

Potential Interview Questions for the participant:

 1. In what way would you describe your body?
 2. How would you describe the perception you have of your body?
 3. How do you think you are affected by these outlooks regarding your body?
 4. How would you describe your identity?
 5. How would you describe your gender identity?
 6. In what ways does your gender identity affect your mental health?
 7. What is your belief regarding the impacts your gender identity has on your mental health for your overall well-being?
 8. What are some words, phrases, or thoughts that you would use to describe your body?
 9. What are some words, phrases, or thoughts that you would use to describe your mental health?
10. (Hypothetical, regardless of whether or not they are taking puberty suppressors) If you had access to medication that suppresses puberty, how might your thoughts regarding your body change?
11. (Hypothetical, regardless of whether or not they are taking puberty suppressors) If you had access to medication that suppresses puberty, how might you describe your mental health?
12. What would you say would most improve your mental health at the moment?
13. How does your mental health impact your life?
14. How would you describe your thoughts when you are feeling down or depressed?
15. What would you say causes you the most mental stress at the moment?
16. When you feel down or depressed, what are some words, phrases, or thoughts that come to your mind?
17. What is your internal monologue like on a typical day?
18. What has helped your mental health recently?
19. What has hurt your mental health recently?
20. Do you ever have thoughts of hurting yourself?
21. If you are comfortable, could you describe some of these thoughts about hurting yourself?
22. Do you ever think about suicide?
23. If you are comfortable, could you describe some of these thoughts about suicide?
24. Is there an experience you’ve had that you would like to discuss regarding the mental impact it had on you?
25. Do you mind walking me through the changes in your mental health over the past month?
26. (If they are on puberty suppressors) How do you think puberty suppressors have changed your thoughts, if at all?
27. (If they are not on puberty suppressors) How do you think not being on puberty suppressors has changed your thoughts, if at all?
28. How are your feelings after our conversation?
29. Is there anything else you would like to talk about?
30. What was difficult or easy about this interview?