+++
autoThumbnailImage = true
categories = ["NYU"]
coverImage = ""
date = 2022-10-04T04:00:00Z
keywords = []
tags = ["psychology", "mental health"]
thumbnailImage = ""
thumbnailImagePosition = ""
title = "Invisible Identities"

+++
The Cultures of Psychology are vast; nuance and diversity are the spearheads of what it means to understand intersectionality and its role within a culture. Still, one continues to come to mind that has not necessarily had its chance on stage: Invisible Identities. I believe the idea of invisible identities is profound. To me, all of my identities are invisible, making experiences for me very different from those that are seeable. Invisible identities mean many things: stereotypes, the gaining or losing of power, the gaining or losing of identity, and the difficulties of exposing these identities to the world. For this essay, I would like to explore how the concept of invisible identities can differ or be similar, in some ways and specifically, I want to discuss how invisible identities play a role in privilege.

For someone who holds visible identities that contradict some of their invisible identities, it can change the outside perspective, and the inner dynamic one has with oneself regarding their privilege. In Peggy McIntosh’s article, “White privilege and Male privilege,” she discusses the systemic, institutional frameworks that govern western society at large and how that grants both males and white people benefits just because of how they present to the world. She expounds that it is not enough to acknowledge and make individual changes in order to dismantle these systems and institutions but instead use the power one has, to do so (McIntosh, 1988). Concerning invisible identities, these ideas stay the same but look different. For example, someone who is white presenting but comes from a Hispanic background may garner aspects of white privilege. Or, someone who is nonbinary may gain male privilege despite their gender identity. These are ways in which an invisible identity can contradict how the outside world perceives them. This can also change how someone has a dialogue with their inner self; they may question how or when to reveal their identity and whether or not to revoke a mistaken identity. McIntosh’s article shifts the perspective on how to wield one’s privilege. Still, because there may be a mistaken privilege with an invisible identity, it makes one question how one should wield a misplaced privilege.

In the case of someone who is Hispanic but is seen as white presenting, it is obviously mentally taxing and can be detrimental to a core identity they have; however, if we were to take that privilege out of that particular context, should they be expected to hone their white privilege to help dismantle the systemic oppression that plagues Hispanics within America? It’s a vast, tricky question to answer. It’s one that I have yet to tackle adequately.

To begin to address the question, I think looking at Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s TedTalk, which discusses “The Danger of a Single Story,” is a way of gaining a culturally cognizant perspective. Her talk depicts how using only one perspective to look at an issue is perilous for both those writing and reading it (Ngozi Adichie, 2009). A quote that stood out to me that is prevalent in the conversation about invisible identities was, “Stories have been used to dispossess and to malign, but stories can also be used to empower and to humanize. Stories can break the dignity of a people, but stories can also repair that broken dignity.” These ideas of the double-sidedness of stories help open up a pathway for finding a way to present invisible identities. It brings hope that both identities are essential and can play a significant role in how we both use and disavow our privileges.

Using the example previously mentioned, I think in the context of this quote, we can begin to unravel the mystery of how to use misplaced privilege given because of invisible identities. McIntosh’s ideas state that we must own and recognize the privilege to then use it to dismantle systemic oppression. In contrast, Ngozi Adichie states that it is a back-and-forth as well as a collaboration to tell the most authentic stories. To get to McIntosh’s endpoint of using one’s privilege, you must first understand and accept Ngozi Adichie’s idea of being true to oneself while also accepting others’ perspectives. In the case of someone who is white-passing, I believe that this means you must stay true to yourself and your Hispanic heritage while simultaneously acknowledging your white privilege as a way of garnering the respect of others to help dismantle the oppression. This is clearly easier said than done and is really idealistic. I should also mention that- while I agree and believe that it's vital to own and use one’s identities, I do not believe that the need for social progression should dictate your personhood and life. It is ok to take a break from the constant fighting.

I think Bell Hook’s mother best quotes my final point regarding invisible identities; “You can take what the white people have to offer, but you do not have to love them.” It ties in best with my previous idea that you should be able to utilize misplaced privileges, but you should not have to ‘love’ that identity (Hooks, 1990). What I mean by that is that privilege- especially white privilege- is something that should be taken advantage of to help disassemble systemic and institutional oppressive structures. So whether or not you own that identity as yours, which you do not have to, if you can employ that privilege for the benefit of your invisible identities, then, by all means, one should do so. The quote itself does not directly say what I am using it to say. Still, it makes the excellent point that your power of identity allows you to distinguish between helpful knowledge from the dominating group and participate in that knowledge without “estrangement, alienation, and, worse, assimilation and cooption” (Hooks, 1990). This is precisely what I am trying to get at when discussing misplaced privilege and invisible identities.

To conclude this thought, I believe that “Out of Site, Out of Mind: Managing Invisible Social Identities in the Work Place,” by Clair and Colleagues, does a great job of breaking down the contexts in which people face the contradictions of their invisible identities. It denotes examples and outlines how, when, and why people choose or not to reveal identities within the workplace (Clair et al., 2005). I think while this is a more elementary version of what I am discussing, it is a real-life application of what I have learned and discussed both in this essay and within the class. In particular, this article helped me picture how my invisible identities will affect me in the future in the workplace (Clair et al., 2005). When I reveal my invisible identities, it is because I know I am safe. However, the article explores much of what we discuss in class and what I’ve noted in this essay, that sometimes, it is of greater importance to reveal an identity for a multitude of reasons (Clair et al., 2005). I think at the core of invisible identities within the context of privilege is finding a balance between honoring yourself and honoring your identities.

**References**

Clair, J. A., Beatty, J. E., & Maclean, B. L. (2005, January). Out of Sight but Not out of Mind: Managing Invisible Social Identities in the Workplace. _The Academy of Management Review_, _30_(1), 78–95. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/20159096](https://www.jstor.org/stable/20159096 "https://www.jstor.org/stable/20159096")

Hooks, B. (1990). Homeplace (A Site of Resistance). _Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics_, 1(1), [https://libcom.org/article/homeplace-site-resistance](https://libcom.org/article/homeplace-site-resistance "https://libcom.org/article/homeplace-site-resistance")

Ngozi Adichie, C. (2009, October). _Danger of a Single Story_ \[Video\]. TED Conferences. [https://www.ted.com/talks/chimamanda_ngozi_adichie_the_danger_of_a_single_story](https://www.ted.com/talks/chimamanda_ngozi_adichie_the_danger_of_a_single_story "https://www.ted.com/talks/chimamanda_ngozi_adichie_the_danger_of_a_single_story")

Peggy McIntosh. (1988). White Privilege and Male Privilege. In _National SEED Project for Inclusive Curriculum_. Wellesley College. Retrieved October 2, 2022, from [https://www.nationalseedproject.org/images/documents/White_Privilege_and_Male_Privilege_Personal_Account-Peggy_McIntosh.pdf](https://www.nationalseedproject.org/images/documents/White_Privilege_and_Male_Privilege_Personal_Account-Peggy_McIntosh.pdf "https://www.nationalseedproject.org/images/documents/White_Privilege_and_Male_Privilege_Personal_Account-Peggy_McIntosh.pdf")